gh-3108: Avoid materializing f_locals for KI protection (#3110)
python-trio/trio: newsfragments/3108.bugfix.rst

> avoid materializing frame.f_locals in KI protection code, this causes locals to persist in the frame.f_locals snapshot even if they are deleted on 3.12 and below

Reviewer: I think this should be cast as a feature -- in addition to fixing locals materialization, I would expect it to also be good for performance and tracebacks because we're adding extra frames in far fewer places. Also, please use rST formatting and full sentences in newsfragments so our release notes are pleasant for users to read.

Author: could you help me out with the phrasing for this, please?

Reviewer: ```
Rework KeyboardInterrupt protection to track code objects, rather than frames,
as protected or not. This should substantially reduce its overhead, and also fixes
an issue with the previous implementation: locals' lifetimes will no longer be
extended by materialization in the ``frame.f_locals`` dictionary that the previous
KI protection logic needed to access to do its work.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Rework KeyboardInterrupt protection to track code objects, rather than frames,
as protected or not. This should substantially reduce its overhead, and also fixes
an issue with the previous implementation: locals' lifetimes will no longer be
extended by materialization in the ``frame.f_locals`` dictionary that the previous
KI protection logic needed to access to do its work.
```

as protected or not. The new implementation no longer needs to access
``frame.f_locals`` dictionaries, so it won't artificially extend the lifetime of
local variables. Since KeyboardInterrupt protection is now imposed statically
(when a protected function is defined) rather than each time the function runs,
its previously-noticeable performance overhead should now be near zero.
The lack of a call-time wrapper has some other benefits as well:

* :func:`inspect.iscoroutinefunction` and the like now give correct answers when
  called on KI-protected functions.

* Calling a synchronous KI-protected function no longer pushes an additional stack
  frame, so tracebacks are clearer.

* A synchronous KI-protected function invoked from C code (such as a weakref
  finalizer) is now guaranteed to start executing; previously there would be a brief
  window in which KeyboardInterrupt could be raised before the protection was
  established.

One minor drawback of the new approach is that it is no longer possible to apply
different KI protection rules to different instances of the same closure. See the
documentation of `@enable_ki_protection <trio.lowlevel.enable_ki_protection>`

> for more details and a workaround.

Reviewer 2: "For a workaround" doesn't work with "no longer possible" IMO.

Reviewer: maybe: "One minor drawback of the new approach is that multiple instances of the same closure share a single KeyboardInterrupt protection state (because they share a single code object). That means that if you apply `@enable_ki_protection` to some of them and not others, you won't get the protection semantics you asked for. See [etc]"

> One minor drawback of the new approach is that it is no longer possible to apply
> different KI protection rules to different instances of the same closure. See the
> documentation of `@enable_ki_protection <trio.lowlevel.enable_ki_protection>`
> for more details and a workaround.

Author: ```suggestion
One minor drawback of the new approach is that multiple instances of the same
closure share a single KeyboardInterrupt protection state (because they share a
single code object). That means that if you apply 
`@enable_ki_protection <trio.lowlevel.enable_ki_protection>` to some of them
and not others, you won't get the protection semantics you asked for. See the
documentation of `@enable_ki_protection <trio.lowlevel.enable_ki_protection>`
for more details and a workaround.
```

Rework KeyboardInterrupt protection to track code objects, rather than frames,

> as protected or not. This should substantially reduce its overhead, and also fixes

Author: this PR actually solves at least 4 issues and I'm not sure how to format it nicely:

* the f_locals materialization
* ki_protection is now applied as soon as the function code is pushed to the stack, so now it will work for weakref finalizers where finalization is crucial
* ki_protection doesn't hide the type of the decorated function so inspect.isgeneratorfunction and inspect.iscoroutinefunction works
* "@TRIO_KI_PROTECTION_ENABLED" doesn't show up when debugging - although maybe that was useful in some cases

Reviewer 2: For the third one, you can make another newsfragment called 2670.something.rst to separate it out.

After all, that's https://github.com/python-trio/trio/issues/2670.

Reviewer: Here's my attempt:
```
Rework KeyboardInterrupt protection to track code objects, rather than frames,
as protected or not. The new implementation no longer needs to access
``frame.f_locals`` dictionaries, so it won't artificially extend the lifetime of
local variables. Since KeyboardInterrupt protection is now imposed statically
(when a protected function is defined) rather than each time the function runs,
its previously-noticeable performance overhead should now be near zero.
The lack of a call-time wrapper has some other benefits as well:

* :func:`inspect.iscoroutinefunction` and the like now give correct answers when
  called on KI-protected functions.

* Calling a synchronous KI-protected function no longer pushes an additional stack
  frame, so tracebacks are clearer.

* A synchronous KI-protected function invoked from C code (such as a weakref
  finalizer) is now guaranteed to start executing; previously there would be a brief
  window in which KeyboardInterrupt could be raised before the protection was
  established.

One minor drawback of the new approach is that it is no longer possible to apply
different KI protection rules to different instances of the same closure. See the
documentation of `@enable_ki_protection <trio.lowlevel.enable_ki_protection>`
for more details and a workaround.
```
(Personally I wouldn't mention the weird local; it's sort of implied by mentioning that we don't access locals anymore, and it seems likely to confuse people who haven't happened to encounter it in their debuggers.)

And then I would extend the `@enable_ki_protection` documentation with something like:
```
Since KeyboardInterrupt protection is tracked per code object, any attempt to
conditionally protect the same block of code in different ways is unlikely to behave
how you expect. If you try to conditionally protect a closure, it will be
unconditionally protected instead::

    def example(protect: bool) -> bool:
        def inner() -> bool:
            return trio.lowlevel.currently_ki_protected()
        if protect:
            inner = trio.lowlevel.enable_ki_protection(inner)
        return inner()

    assert example(False) == False
    assert example(True) == True  # once protected ...
    assert example(False) == True  # ... always protected

If you really need conditional protection, you can achieve it by giving each
KI-protected instance of the closure its own code object::

    def example(protect: bool) -> bool:
        def inner() -> bool:
            return trio.lowlevel.currently_ki_protected()
        if protect:
            inner.__code__ = inner.__code__.replace()
            inner = trio.lowlevel.enable_ki_protection(inner)
        return inner()

    assert example(False) == False
    assert example(True) == True
    assert example(False) == False

(This isn't done by default because it carries some memory overhead and reduces
the potential for specializing optimizations in recent versions of CPython.)
```
